---
layout: post
title:  "Spanner: Google's Globally Distributed Database"
#modified:   2014-11-28 14:03:35 -0600
tags: [spanner, distributed systems, papers, google, databases]
category: scientific-reading
comments:
share:

---

> J. C. Corbett, J. Dean, M. Epstein, A. Fikes, C. Frost, J. J. Furman, S. Ghemawat, A. Gubarev, C. Heiser, P. Hochschild, and others, “Spanner: Google’s globally distributed database,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), vol. 31, no. 3, p. 8, 2013.

## Abstract ##

<small>Spanner is Google's scalable, multi-version, globally-distributed, and synchronously-replicated database. It is the first system to distribute data at global scale and support externally-consistent distributed transactions. This paper describes how Spanner is structured, its feature set, the rationale underlying various design decisions, and a novel time API that exposes clock uncertainty. This API and its implementation are critical to supporting external consistency and a variety of powerful features: non-blocking reads in the past, lock-free read-only transactions, and atomic schema changes, across all of Spanner.</small>

## Critical Reading ##

When dealing with data stores that contain mission critical or extremely valuable information that is used by many individuals all over the world, you want to ensure that the data remains consistent and is durable across data centers that span the globe. Data replication provides durability, clients accessing geographically close servers gives low latency, and because multiple replicas have data, failure can be easily handled. Creating a database system that manages cross-data center replication  that is synchronously replicated, however, is a major challenge especially when attempting to allow lock-free read only transactions and atomic, linear changes that are consistent and versioned.

To date, the systems that we have discussed in class have focused on transactional invariants that give stronger semantics than simple eventual consistency to provide a data service that expands our understanding of CAP. These data systems have primarily been key-value stores, which simplifies the data storage expectations to look at transactional invariants (and explore DHTs and other techniques). However, from the application perspective, a key-value store is difficult to use for applications that have complex schemas that might be subject to change or for applications that are happy to lose some availability in favor of strong semantics for wide area consistency.

Spanner is a globally distributed database that provides _external consistency_ between data centers and stores data in a schema based semi-relational data structure. Not only that, Spanner provides a versioned view of the data that allows for instantaneous snapshot isolation across any segment of the data. This versioned isolation allows Spanner to provide globally consistent reads of the database at a particular time allowing for lock-free read-only transactions (and therefore no communications overhead for consensus during these types of reads). Spanner also provides externally consistent reads and writes with a timestamp-based linear execution of transactions and two phase commits. Spanner is the first distributed database that provides global sharding and replication with strong consistency semantics.

The primary innovation of Spanner is its implementation of timestamp management an linear serializability of transactions via a trusted global time, a system they call `TrueTime`. `TrueTime` represents timestamps as an interval, the timestamp +/- some uncertainty concerning the true time. The use of uncertainty means that Spanner will slow down to ensure that there is no local time conflict with the global system time and provide a reliable timestamp for each transaction in the system. The implementation of TrueTime involves the use of distributed master time servers that have GPS and atomic clocks and an polling daemon on clients that implements a time synchronization protocol with several masters and computes uncertainty of local clock drift.

I was duly impressed with Spanner - not only does it provide a strong consistency model across a globally distributed system, it also implements a semi-relational interface that more applications can use with ease over NoSQL proposals (including a structured query language, schemas, and client-specific control of wide-area replication). Spanner is rightly robust (as it contains Google's most valuable data, the advertising network) with an impressive latency, even using Paxos for consensus under the hood. However, this system is not practical as an open source, academic, or research system. Google calls a Spanner implementation a "universe" and there are only three Google Spanner "universes" and rightly so - multiple data centers with atomic and GPS clocks is an expensive proposition! However, because the innovation relies on strong universal time, and the use of Marzullo's algorithm to ensure multiple timeservers give an accurate time stamp, it may be possible to rely on the strong global time invariant to explore other consistency models (much like GPS allows us to explore other scientific research related to things beyond navigation) so long as someone sets up a universally available `TrueTime` protocol system that anyone can connect to!

## Other Notes ##

This paper was my responsibility for presentation to the course, and to start the presentation, I was asked to play the video of the presentation by Wilson Hsieh at OSDI 2012 (links below). Wilson focused (rightly so) on `TrueTime` after giving a clear example of why Spanner is important in the context of a social network. He skipped most of the implementation details of Spanner that were presented in the paper. My presentation focused primarily on the implementation details, since `TrueTime` was discussed in detail, the links to the presentation I gave can also be found below.

In my presentation, I couldn't help compare Spanner to BigTable, another Google paper that I may have to blog about (and my systems research may as well be called Google distributed systems!). Like BigTable, Spanner uses a data structure called Tablets under the hood, essentially a bag of related key value pairs. Unlike BigTable, the keys aren't only the (rowid, colid) but also contain the `TrueTime` timestamp to provide the external consistency. At many places throughout the presentation I focused on the key differences between Spanner and BigTable, and I think they're important to note.

While BigTable motivated many columnar data stores like Cassandra and HBase; users have had a difficult time switching over to the data model exposed by it. Instead, Spanner is a drop in replacement for MySQL - something other NoSQL databases cannot claim. Although the consistency model is not eventually consistent (or shall we say, highly available, if we're discussing CAP) because it uses Paxos to synchronize at write, it does provide speed and flexibility with the external consistency model. It will be interesting to see future papers from Google and whether or not they discuss how their internal projects float from BigTable to Megastore to Spanner, etc.

### Links ###

- [OSDI 2012 Spanner Video](https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi12/technical-sessions/presentation/corbett)
- [CSMC 818E Presentation Slides](http://www.slideshare.net/BenjaminBengfort/an-overview-of-spanner-googles-globally-distributed-database)
